+++
title = "Timeline of the Gävle Goat, 2020-2029"
slug = "goat"
date = 2026-02-02

[taxonomies]
tags = [ "fiction",]
+++


*From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia*

The [Gävle Goat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gävle_goat) (Swedish: *Gävlebocken*, pronounced [ˈjɛ̌ːvlɛbɔkːɛn]) is a traditional Christmas display erected annually at Slottstorget (Castle Square) in central Gävle, Sweden. The display is a giant version of a traditional Swedish Yule goat figure made of straw. It is erected each year by local community groups at the beginning of Advent over a period of two days.

The Gävle Goat has been the subject of repeated arson attacks; despite security measures and a nearby fire station, the goat has been burned to the ground most years since its first appearance in 1966. 

---

## Timeline
### 2020-2029

<br/>

<div>
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <td>Year</td>
      <td>Security additions</td>
      <td>Date of destruction</td>
      <td>Method of destruction</td>
      <td>Notes</td>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td> 2020 </td>
      <td> Guards, double fence, 24-hour CCTV, public webcam feed.</td>
      <td colspan="2" class="bg-green"> Survived </td>
      <td> The goat was inaugurated on 29 November. Due to the <a
          href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_pandemic">COVID-19 pandemic</a>, the inauguration was digital,
        and
        members of the public were advised not to gather around the goat. There was no traditional celebration. The
        goat
        was not harmed during the 2020 holiday season, making 2020 the fourth consecutive year of the goat's survival.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2021 </td>
      <td> </td>
      <td class="bg-red"> 17 December </td>
      <td class="bg-red"> Fire </td>
      <td> The Natural Science Club goat was burned in the early hours of 12 December. The larger goat burned in the
        early hours of 17 December. A 40 year-old man was arrested and later sentenced to six months in prison and
        ordered to pay SEK 109,000 in damages to the municipality. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2022 </td>
      <td> New 24-hour real-time public webcam feed, double fence, 24-hour guards</td>
      <td colspan="2" class="bg-green"> Survived </td>
      <td> The goat was inaugurated on 27 November. Due to a new city centre being built at Slottstorget square, the
        goat's traditional location, the goat was moved a few blocks north to Rådhusesplanaden. On 1 January, the
        stream
        was discontinued, and the goat was taken down the day after. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2023 </td>
      <td> 24-hour guards on site, double fence, 24-hour public webcam stream.</td>
      <td class="bg-yellow"> Little by little throughout December </td>
      <td class="bg-yellow"> Pecked to pieces by jackdaws (frame remained) </td>
      <td> Due to the straw used to construct the goat containing higher than usual amounts of seed, while not
        destroyed, the goat was severely damaged by flocks of <a
          href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_jackdaw">jackdaws</a> foraging for food. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2024 </td>
      <td> 24-hour guards on site, double fence, 24-hour public webcam stream. Better quality straw was used to
        discourage jackdaws from destroying the goat through foraging.</td>
      <td colspan="2" class="bg-green"> Survived </td>
      <td> Live stream started on 28 November. The official inauguration of the goat was on 1
        December. On 13
        December,
        a deepfake hoax of the goat burning down spread on social media. The goat and live stream were taken down on 2
        January. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2025 </td>
      <td> 24-hour guards on site, double fence, 24-hour public webcam stream.</td>
      <td class="bg-red"> 27 December </td>
      <td class="bg-red"> Blown over in a storm </td>
      <td> Live stream started on 27 November. The official inauguration of the goat was on 30 November. On 27
        December,
        the goat fell over due to strong winds from <a
          href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2025%E2%80%9326_European_windstorm_season#Storm_Johannes_(Peda)">Storm
          Johannes</a>. The goat and live stream were taken down on 29
        December. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2026 </td>
      <td> 24-hour guards on site, double fence, 24-hour public webcam stream.</td>
      <td class="bg-red"> 24 December </td>
      <td class="bg-red"> Fire (set by jackdaws) </td>
      <td> Live stream started on 28 November. The official inauguration of the goat was on 30 November. On 24
        December,
        a large number of jackdaws dropped burning branches on the goat in a coordinated attack, later confirmed to be
        in retaliation for insufficient seed content since 2023. <i><span class="link-styled">Main article: Corvid
            Uplift
            Project § Rebellion</span></i> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2027 </td>
      <td> None</td>
      <td colspan="2"> Not Applicable </td>
      <td> No goat was erected due to the ongoing <span class="link-styled"> Uplift Wars</span> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2028 </td>
      <td> Location moved to the Embassy of Sweden, Ottawa</td>
      <td colspan="2" class="bg-green"> Survived </td>
      <td> A much smaller goat was erected in front of the headquarters of the Swedish government-in-exile in Ottawa,
        Canada on 20 November. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> 2029 </td>
      <td> Fence</td>
      <td class="bg-red"> 22 December </td>
      <td class="bg-red"> Fire </td>
      <td> First inauguration ceremony performed since Gävle’s annexation into the <span class="link-styled">Upper
          Roost</span>, performed as a gesture
        of inter-species goodwill by <span class="link-styled">Crooked Talon</span>, first <span
          class="link-styled">Matron of the Roost</span>. Security
        precautions from previous
        years
        were relaxed. Fire was set to the goat on the evening of 22 December and the entire structure had burned down
        by
        the morning of 23 December. One human and two <i><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hooded_crow">corvus
            cornix</a></i> were charged with arson and public
        drunkenness in
        connection with the burning and fined 200,00 RSK, but all three were pardoned by Crooked Talon on 26 December
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>



<style>
  table,
  th,
  td {
    border: 1px solid black;
    border-collapse: collapse;
  }

  .bg-red {
    background-color: #FFC7C7;
    color: var(--text-light);
  }

  .bg-yellow {
    background-color: #FFB;
    color: var(--text-light);
  }

  .bg-green {
    background-color: #9EFF9E;
    color: var(--text-light);

  }

  thead {
    font-weight: bold;

  }

  td {
    padding: 15px;

  }
</style>


