+++
title = "Isn't It Ergodic"
slug = "ergodic"
date = 2026-03-27
aliases = [ "blog/ergodic",]

[taxonomies]
tags = [ "media", "thinkin",]
+++

[Ergodic literature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ergodic_literature) is "a mode of textual organization in which nontrivial effort is required to traverse the text, beyond ordinary eye movement or turning pages". Some examples you may already be familiar with: *House of Leaves,* Nabokov's *Pale Fire,*  those *Choose Your Own Adventure* books with names like *Prisoner of the Ant People.*

Think of those works as one end of a spectrum, rather than an isolated category, because a lot of books require "nontrivial effort to traverse the text" that wouldn't generally be given the "ergodic" label.  *[The Name of the Rose,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Name_of_the_Rose)*  for example, includes passages in Latin without a translation; you, the reader, are expected to break out the ol' [Lewis & Short](https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.04.0059), or these days the ol' [Page & Brin](https://google.com), to puzzle out what they mean. Unless you yourself are a 19th century whaler you would probably need to expend "nontrivial effort" to look up the meaning of words like "parmacetty" and "filliping" in *Moby-Dick*

In that halcyon golden age before the Internet, if you were reading a book and came upon an untranslated passage in a language you didn't know, or an oblique reference to some obscure philosopher, or even just an unfamiliar word, figuring out the meaning required a whole song-and-dance. In the best case you could pull out the corresponding volume of your encyclopedia, scan for the entry and skim it, and be back on your way relatively quickly; in the worst case the reference was obscure enough to not have an entry and no one in your area knew about it either, forcing you to  forge ahead in the hope that wasn't the secret key to unlocking the hidden meaning of the entire text.  And yet, premodern books still contained untranslated passages in other languages, and oblique philosophical references, and uncommon words you can't be expected to grok from context, and people seemed to muddle through alright. 


Now that we live in a hellscape of informational post-scarcity this is of course a non-issue. If you don't know a word, you can simply Ask Jeeves for a definition and get a response instantly. Machine translation is good enough you can be confidant you're at least getting the correct gist, subtler shades of meaning notwithstanding. Yet the average new book seems to be, if anything, *easier* to parse without special effort. The measured reading level for the most popular novels [has been decreasing steadily for decades](https://centre-for-humanities-computing.github.io/fabula-net/blog/diachronic). I don't think it's a coincidence either that Wikipedia's list of ergodic works includes only one example from the past decade (the novel *[XX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XX_(novel))*, which I have not read but looks neat).

Now that readers have access to whole new modes of narrative interaction, why aren't authors taking more advantage of that? If the computer is a [bicycle for the mind](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Steve_Jobs#1990s), why is our literature still so pedestrian? Why aren't we erdodicity-maxxing?  My answer is that we actually are, and we have been for a while now, but we arbitrarily drew a line around what is "literature" to exclude the works that take the most advantage.

---

While it's much easier to Google a quote than it is to scan for it in your copy of *Bartlett's Quotations,* it still kind of sucks to put down your book, pick up your computer/phone and type out the text in the search box, so authors would understandably want to limit that by not getting too obscure. But for digital texts this doesn't apply; any decent e-reader software can search for and translate highlighted text nearly instantly. In fact if you're fully committing to digital text why not go further and make your references [hypertext](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext)?[^2]

There is, in fact, a thriving subculture of hypertext fiction that does exactly this, but it's forever doomed to be niche because it is so unavoidably nontraditional in structure. To illustrate - the [SCP Foundation](https://scp-wiki.wikidot.com) is probably the single most successful work of hypertext fiction, a deeply linked mesh of characters, concepts, lore, and stories with no single intended narrative line, only a set of paths the reader is invited to wander between at will. One such route within the labyrinth is a series of entries by a user with the handle [qntm](https://qntm.org/) presented as a mixture of classic SCP anomaly reports and more traditional character-driven narrative sections. The story [We Need To Talk About Fifty-Five](https://scp-wiki.wikidot.com/we-need-to-talk-about-fifty-five)  is a good illustration of what I mean about the structure of SCP media as a whole - it's narratively self-contained, and you can read and enjoy it with no background, yet it's still embedded in the wider SCP universe through hypertext. A conversational mention of [SCP-013](https://scp-wiki.wikidot.com/scp-013) gets a link you call follow if you'd like to know more, or you can keep going uninterrupted, it's up to you.

The mainstream cultural literati didn't really take note of all this until it was picked up for its second print run by an imprint of Random House (the first print run was self published and mostly only noted by existing SCP fans) in November of 2025, titled *There Is No Antimemetics Division* and with the SCP-specific references expunged for licensing reasons. It's that version that was reviewed and discussed by the usual suspects, you know, The New Washingtoner Post-Times Literary Supplement etc etc. On one level this is odd: a work set in the interconnected world of the SCP project is exactly what benefits the most from hypertext, yet in order to breach containment TiNAMD became *less* hypertextual. The print version suffers, unavoidably, by being "just" a book - a good book to be sure, but a book that feels limited by its medium. On another level this makes perfect sense, because the form of the written word with the most cultural clout, that everyone thinks of first when they hear "literature, remains the regular non-hypertextual book, either as physical dead trees or a file format that intentionally limits itself to the emulation of dead trees. It's just too firmly wedged in the noosphere to dislodge at this point. 

 Actually, there's an argument to be made that digital ergodic media is now both wildly more popular and wildly more profitable as an industry than traditional books, in spite of the latter's monopoly on "real" culture. The Wikipedia article I linked right at the start includes a list of ergodic works; On that list, in addition to the aforementioned *Pale Fire* and *House of Leaves* and other items we call "literature" without qualification, is *[Colossal Cave Adventure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colossal_Cave_Adventure)*, often shortened to just *Adventure*, the (arguably) first video game in the genre that we now call *Adventure Games* in homage. 

Is *Adventure* literature? I think if you want to apply that label to *Choose Your Own Adventure*, or to the novel described in *[The Garden of Forking Paths](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Garden_of_Forking_Paths)* the only reason to deny it to *Adventure* is ink-on-paper chauvinism, e.g. you'd need to bite the bullet that a paper copy of *Journey Under The Sea* was somehow more literary than the same text in .epub format. Going one step further, consider the definition of ergodic literature one more time: "a mode of textual organization in which nontrivial effort is required to traverse the text." If you squint, and if you apply the broader definition of "text" as not limited to static words, can you see how that might describe *all video games?*


For some games, particularly those that can trace a direct line of inspiration from *Adventure* or from the parallel phenomenon of tabletop roleplaying games[^2] - *Disco Elysium*, *Baldur's Gate*, etc - this isn't too much of a stretch intuitively. but the description applies to more narratively linear games too;  what distinguishes *Death Stranding* from a very long, strange film is the "nontrivial effort" required from the audience to virtually trudge from A to B before they're allowed to see the next scene. In *Tetris* and other story-light arcade style games the narrative is created on the fly by the player's "nontrivial effort" (ok maybe that one is a reach). From this perspective computer technology did, in fact, usher in a new wave of more complex and more interactive literature, but we stopped calling it "literature" and started calling it "video games"


Perhaps this is part of why the overall semantic and structural complexity of popular fiction has apparently gone down over time. If you want to tell a story in a way that necessitates active participation from the audience, and that takes full advantage of all our modern digital affordance for doing so, the end product will no longer be considered literature.  

---

[^1]: I am excessively tickled by this legitimate use of an [autological word](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autological_word) 

[^2]: Are TTRPGs ergodic literature then? Maybe? Sometimes? I don't know, it's language games all the way down. My own purely vibes-based opinion is that "literature" can't be generated extemporaneously in the way a TTRPG session is. In D&D you can do (or at least attempt to do) literally anything you can imagine, and that works even if you're in a situation outside of what the rulebook proscribes because the Dungeon Master is there to interpret and referee on the fly. I think "literature" implies a purely *asynchronous* curation of the audience experience; the author decides what kinds of interactions are possible, then that decision is unable to be challenged or fudged *ad hoc* by a DM-type figure.
