+++
title = "Digitally Gardening"
slug = "garden"
date = 2026-03-24
aliases = [ "blog/garden",]

[taxonomies]
tags = [ "meta", "web", "thinkin",]
+++


The term ["digital garden"](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history) was originally coined to describe a personal website where each page is an evolving work in progress that might be updated or changed as the author sees fit. This site does not fit that definition - I try to leave pages static after publication, mostly to keep the syndication feed experience as smooth as possible - but I've come to think of it as like a garden in another sense: it's the opposite of a farm.

By garden I specifically mean a [kitchen garden](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitchen_garden), a little patch set aside in the yard to grow vegetables and herbs and such. A kitchen garden usually does not make sense on purely economic grounds, at least here in North America. Once you factor in the cost of seeds, soil, fertilizer, and especially the labor to plant, tend to, and harvest your crop, you're probably paying like $1.50 for a single green bean. 

But the goal of a kitchen garden is not to maximize calories produced per dollar spent, the goal is to have a little place of your own, where you can get your hands dirty and touch grass. You can encounter novel but low-stakes problems and bend your brain into fun new shapes to solve them -  what's the best arrangement of plants that maximizes sun exposure? Do you have the right climate for an avocado tree? How can you keep the rabbits from eating all the lettuce? And then, at the end of a season of hard work, you're rewarded with a crop that may be stunted or wonky or misshapen, but that's *yours* in a more profound way than a tomato from the grocery store would be.

A farm has different goals. A farm produces a commodity, and if the cost of producing the commodity goes above the price they get for it, they fail[^1]. There's of course variation within the group - not all farms are endless fields of mega-fertilized high-yield GMO soybeans - but the economics apply even to the bespoke farm-to-table operations where they tuck each carrot in at night. A farm is output-oriented; a garden is process-oriented.


A farm is of course not a bad thing - pragmatically, we need farms more than we need gardens. The digital equivalent of a farm would include more or less all news sites and "serious" publications (and a ton of botslop as well, the high fructose corn syrup of the Web). Valuing output over process is often the correct move. That said, I like to think of this site as my own patch of lumpy rutabegas: it's economically inefficient, labor-intensive, and the results are often wonky looking or occasionally outright unusable, but it's unquestionably mine.  


---
[^1]: Ignoring subsidies of course
