



This site now has an official [blogroll!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glossary_of_blogging#B) You can check it out [here](/feeds.opml.xml). 

In classic Me fashion, it took a lot of work and multiple dead ends to implement a niche trick most people will never notice or care about. But! I had a fun time and learned a lot about XML. The remainder of this post is to recount that odyssey. 

About a month ago, I got an idea.  The standard way to share subscription lists, the [OPML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OPML) format, is a dialect of XML; so is HTML. XML lets you import features from different dialects through [namespacing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_namespace), so can you add HTML stuff to an OPML document to make it render all nice and pretty in a browser, while remaining spec-complient to import into a feed reader? 

The answer is yes!

<!-- explaination of xhtml and xmlns:html -->


This works for a simple proof of concept, and if all you want is to apply CSS styles to an OPML document without altering its structure it's a neat, simple solution. Trying to manipulate the DOM with embedded Javascript is, however, incredibly jank, and since you can't change the root `<opml>` element to `<html>` from within the document you'll always end up with a deformed chimara of a page no matter how many `document.createElement`s you fire off. I couldn't ever get clickable links to work either, despite a lot of fiddling with event handlers. HTML without hypertext doesn't even make sense to call HTML - that's literally in the name!

I was prepared to scale back my plans of 


<!--- --->


In retrospect, I fell for the classic blunder of the  [XY problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XY_problem). Instead of asking "How can I make an XML document render as HTML in a browser but retain its original format when accessed otherwise?", I latched onto the existing tool I had for client-side DOM manipulation and asked "How can I use Javascript in an XML document to modify its structure?". 
The answer to that second question turned out to be "with tedious effort and mediocre results"
