+++
date = 2025-07-09
title =  "Don't Talk About RSS"
slug =  "on-rss"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["web"]
+++

You know what's kinda weird? RSS.[^1] On the one hand, RSS is *ubiquitous*. Youtube, the largest host of online video content by far, provides RSS feeds for each channel. Wordpress, the substrate of something like a fifth of the entire Web, generates RSS feeds by default. Every subreddit becomes an RSS feed if you append `.rss` to the end of the URL (try it!).  Every blog on [Substack](https://support.substack.com/hc/en-us/articles/360038239391-Is-there-an-RSS-feed-for-my-publication), [Ghost](https://ghost.org/integrations/custom-rss/) or [Bear](https://docs.bearblog.dev/rss-and-atom-feeds/) has an RSS feed thrown in for free. If you pick a HTML webpage at random from the whole Web the odds it contains a `<link rel="alternate">` pointing to a syndication feed are pretty good. Any protocol with that level of adoption has unambiguously "made it" in my book.

But in spite of that level of exposure, RSS remains *obscure* outside of certain subcultures. Of the platforms mentioned above, only the blog hosts seem to treat syndicated feeds as a feature they want users to actually know about and use (with the possible exception of Substack). I need to really dig to find any acknowledgement, much less *advertisement*, of channel feeds as a feature from Youtube or Google in general. Ditto for Reddit. RSS is a feature that every major website has, but no major website will tell you about.


I can think of a few reasons for how this came to be. RSS is trivially easy to implement if you already have a site hooked up to a database. The computational and bandwidth costs of hosting what amounts to some static XML are basically nil as well, even moreso if you're dealing with [conditional requests](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_ETag). Something so undemanding can easily become invisible. I can absolutely imagine there have been cases where an intern built an RSS feed for a major website in like 2009 and it's been chugging along below the notice of the decision makers ever since. Another factor is that the tech-savvy "hacker" subculture that's always been a primary audience for RSS is also well represented among the engineering teams of the major Web players. Probably there are a few sites providing RSS just because a particular engineer is a Google Reader veteran.


Still, as independent standardized formats, RSS and Atom exist outside of direct corporate control and are resilient to the kinds of algorithmic behavior shaping the big platforms rely on, and so their very existence is at odds with the core goals of those platforms. Youtube, for example, very much does not want you to interact with their content by subscribing to specific channel feeds in your RSS client, because that limits the amount of ads and "promoted content" it can shove unbidden into your face. Currently the number of people doing this is small enough to go unnoticed, but if RSS were to make a comeback in a big enough way to threaten Youtube's financials you'd better believe the feeds would be unceremoniously yanked down for good. They only reason Youtube and any other big time content host still provides RSS is that no one uses it outside of a handful of weirdos like myself, so it's not worth the effort to remove. RSS has enjoyed its longevity through the Web 2.0 era to the present (are we up to like Web 5.0 now?) in part *because* it remains obscure and mostly overlooked by non-technical folks. 

So maybe the moral is that syndication is great and I highly recommend you try using a RSS client if you don't already, but also maybe try and keep your voice down when you do.



---
[^1]: In line with common usage, I'm using the term RSS as synecdoche for XML-based Web syndication formats in general, including Atom. 
