---json
{
    "title": "Things that Austin, Texas has more of than I'd expected",
    "date": "2024-04-11",
    "tags": [
        "100DaysToOffload",
        "travel"
    ],
    "permalink": "/blog/austin.html",
    "layout": "post.html"
}
---

## Greenery
My mental image of Texas was informed by this airtight syllogism: cowboys live in Texas; cowboys live in the desert; therefore Texas is desert. I did see some proper desert complete with cacti while driving outside Austin, but the city itself and its immediate surroundings are [really shockingly green.](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/10/Covert_Park_at_Mount_Bonnell_20160905130602.jpg) I think this has something to do with how Austin is bisected by the Colorado River -  one of the few reliable all-weather water sources in the whole southwest -  so ecologically it's a literal oasis, but that's just a guess I'm not backing up with any actual research.

## Grackles
All those unexpected trees are also pretty loud, because they all have at least one [grackle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_grackle) sitting in them at all times, without exception. These are starling-like birds, a bit larger than a robin, and I cannot overstate how these guys were *everywhere.* Seriously, I cannot recall ever being outdoors and outside of sight or sound range of a grackle. They're also really loud, especially around dawn and dusk, with a harsh call reminiscent of a power tool.

That description might paint me as anti-grackle, but I actually love the little dudes. In an odd way it made me feel at home to be yelled at by a bunch of black trash birds. Combined with the zero crows I saw there, my hypothesis is that "little bastard bird" is an ecological niche; in Washington it's occupied by corvids, in central Texas it's by grackles.

## Cool Typography
I can't think of any other American city with such a focus on fonts. Portland, OR is maybe second, but it's a distant second. 
In the city center there was a lot of the We-Wish-We-Were-Apple Sans and That-One-Trendy-Serif-Hinge-Uses, same as it ever was, but there's also all kinds of bespoke signage typefaces that appear hand-lettered. Some are obviously new additions that try to affect a retro aesthetic, but most I suspect are actually authentic pieces from the 60s and 70s. It's times like these I wish I had a phone with a decent camera so I could show you some examples.[^1]


---
[^1]: But not that much. I actually like having a terrible camera phone, but that's for another post.



