+++
title = "Fed to the Rules and I Hit the Ground Running"
slug = "running"
date = 2026-04-14
aliases = [ "blog/running",]

[taxonomies]
tags = [ "running",]
+++





As a rule, I don't like to announce my projects until they're already substantially complete. I'm susceptible to a failure mode where talking about doing a thing is close enough to actually doing the thing on some pre-conscious subjective level that it can crowd out my motivation to actually reach the goal, like the psychological equivalent of filling up on bread before the main course arrives.

I'm breaking that rule now by sharing that I will be running the Seattle Marathon on November 29, 2026. Since this is something that requires a lot of sustained commitment over many months of training I'm leaning into the opposite strategy: sharing my plan far and wide, to maximize the potential embarrassment of backing out. I'm telling anyone who will listen that I'm going to run a marathon. I've added an HTTP response header to all responses on this site so that with each and every request the client is made aware that I WILL run a marathon on November 29, 2026 (this is not a joke, you can check). I want YOU, dear reader, to email [marathon@implicit.computer](mailto:marathon@implicit.computer) after November 30 to confirm that I actually did it; if I did not, you have my permission to cyberbully me within an inch of my life.  I'm also not worried about filling up on bread in this case because I need the carbs anyway.


That's the primary takeaway message of this post out of the way; now I figure this is as good a time as any to wax philosophical on my relationship with running. 

Running regularly does have health benefits of course, but that's not the primary reason I do it. Human brains, like certain filesystems, require regular [defragmentation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defragmentation). Over the course of the day I collect a huge pile of sense data, impressions, emotions, ideas, etc, but in that raw incoming state I find it hard to do anything but apply quick reactive judgements. For any deeper introspection I need to set aside time to sift through the pile, put like with like, discard what's harmful and unnecessary, formulate my next move in the bigger picture. Running isn't the only way to do this, but in my experience it's the best and most efficient one.

Human beings are uniquely good among animals at two main things: the first is symbolic reasoning, i.e. the thing you're doing right now to map marks on a page or screen to phonemes, and then phonemes to concepts. The second, often overlooked, is [running for a long time at a moderate speed without stopping.](https://web.archive.org/web/20231226044251/https://doc.rero.ch/record/15289/files/PAL_E2588.pdf) How exactly our ancestors benefited from this is not totally clear, but there are a number of distinguishing features of humans compared to other apes - long legs relative to body size, arched feet, a ~~fat ass~~ highly developed gluteus maximus - that seem to have evolved to maximize the efficacy of sustained running. With that in mind, it's perfectly natural that running and thinking, our two unique pieces of evolutionary heritage, would go hand in hand. I also don't think it's a coincidence that it's while running that I feel the most like a human being.

I am not actually very good at running and so am in no place to give general running advice, however I am probably a top percentile expert on *starting* to run. I have started to run, after an extended period of not running, many, many times, and I've found that, like many other action roguelikes with metaprogression elements, getting into running requires surmounting three obstacles in a set order. The first hurdle is simply believing you are the kind of person who runs. Barring some serious physical disability, you can run a 5k with a bit of preparation. Yes, you. You evolved for this, remember? Runners are not a distinct and immutable category of person; if you put on your shoes and go running, you are definitionally a runner.

The second hurdle is physical: you're using leg muscles in new and exciting ways, so your legs hurt. This goes away within a week or two, thankfully. This hurdle is the most daunting for the *first* first time you start running; if you stop for a while and get back into it, you're safe in the knowledge from your previous experience that this is indeed temporary, but if it's all new to you you'll just have to grit your teeth and trust me.

The third hurdle begins to creep in once you've vanquished the first two. It's the little voice in the back of your head telling you to stop, or slow down, or turn around. Wouldn't it feel so good to just stop right now? In fact, why even start? It's cold and rainy, and your bed is so comfy... The bad news is that this one never really goes away. Sorry. The good news is that getting that voice to shut up is a skill you can improve at with practice. Think of your mind as another muscle that gets stronger with repeated effort (that seems pretty corny when written out, but it's true). If it's difficult, but you're doing it anyway, that means you're getting stronger.

Here's the other primary reason I run: if you keep at it long enough you'll discover that the voice telling you to stop running is the same voice as the one telling you to put off cleaning the kitchen, or to not go to the party because you're anxious about meeting new people, and if you've put in hours and hours of practice ignoring it in one context, ignoring it in other contexts gets a lot easier as well. "Hey, wait a second!", you might say, "Why should I listen to this guy? This is the guy that said I could never run a 5k, why would I care what you think about this?"

(I find it also helps to anthropomorphize the voice as a sniveling, pathetic creature that's never accomplished anything in its joyless life and wants to drag you down to its level. Would you take advice from someone like *that?*)

If there's one thing you should take away from this, it's that if I don't run a marathon this November you are allowed to hunt me for sport. If there's two things, it's that *and* that you can and should give running a shot, even if you don't see yourself as a runner. *Especially* if you don't see yourself as a runner, in fact. 







